**Molecular Docking**

Drug discovery and development is a lengthy and costly process which involves target identification, lead discovery, lead optimization, and preclinical and clinical trials before market approval. Molecular Docking is a useful computational tool that expedites the drug design process. Docking studies help identify new lead compounds for targets with known three-dimensional structures and elucidate the binding poses and biochemical activity resulting from the interaction of the ligand and receptor protein.

Molecular docking is a structure-based drug design (SBDD) computer simulation that predicts the binding mechanism of ligands to receptors. In cancer drug design these receptors are pharmacological protein targets encoded on cancer genes, or polymeric structures in or on a cell, while ligands are mostly small drug molecules, antigens, lectins, neurotransmitters, hormones, lymphokines, biopolymers or macromolecules. To perform a docking study on ligands of interest, the 3D structure of the protein must be known. It can be attained from either X-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance experiments, or receptor homology modelling (Roy _et al_., 2015). Most docking software packages also require the 2D structure of the compound.

Several docking programs and search algorithms are used in molecular docking techniques. Each program uses at least one algorithm to predict possible conformations and orientations of a binary complex (Dias & De Azevedo, 2009). Consequently, the search algorithm used determines the docking performance.  These programs vary with respect to the algorithms, scoring functions and ligand search capabilities (Roy _et al_., 2015). Most commonly used docking software include, AutoDock Vina, FlexX, GOLD, DOCK, LeDock, FRED, LigandFit and UCSF Dock (Sahoo et al., 2022; Agu _et al_., 2023).

When carrying out a docking exercise there are generally two steps involved which include a sampling procedure and ranking based on the score function. In the sampling step, multiple hypothetical conformations of the ligand bound to the receptor are sampled and ranked by the scoring function, though more recent programs use the score function to guide sampling (Paggi _et al_., 2024). In the second step, the scoring function uses input from the binding poses generated to estimate the binding affinities and decide on energetically favourable binary complexes (Paggi _et al_., 2024). The results generated by such _in-silico _studies are improved if the target structure is precise and highly resolved, and have wide biological applications.

Molecular docking serves as a useful tool in multiple stages of the drug discovery process. In brief, it is used to forecast novel molecules that bind to proteins in virtual screening, and predict binding modes of active ligands as well as the binding affinities of analogues. Docking technology is also utilized in medicinal chemistry to predict and synthesize drug-like compounds. Beyond drug discovery, formulation development, computational enzymology, bioremediation, structure-activity relationships studies, and investigation of the effect of a ligand on the target’s structure and function are some other applications for molecular docking (Suresh et_ al_., 2008; Sahoo et al., 2022).

To date, a representative list of drugs making use of structure-based drug design has been reported (Roy _et al_., 2015). Molecular docking is a promising new therapy approach targeting cancer stem cell metabolic and signalling processes (Arjmand _et al_., 2022).

 

**_References._**

Arjmand, B., Hamidpour, S.K., Alavi-Moghadam, S., Yavari, H., Shahbazbadr, A., Tavirani, M.R., Gilany, K., & Larijani, B. (2022). Molecular Docking as a Therapeutic Approach for Targeting Cancer Stem Cell Metabolic Processes. _Frontiers in Pharmacology, 13_. DOI:[10.3389/fphar.2022.768556](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2022.768556)

Agu, P.C., Afiukwa, C.A., Orji, O.U. _et al._ Molecular docking as a tool for the discovery of molecular targets of nutraceuticals in diseases management. _Sci Rep_ **13**, 13398 (2023). <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-40160-2>.

Roy, K., Kar, S. & Das, R.N. (2015). _Understanding the Basics of QSAR for Applications in Pharmaceutical Sciences and Risk Assessment_. Academic Press. [https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801505-6.00010-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801505-6.00010-7 "Persistent link using digital object identifier").

Paggi, J. M., Pandit, A., & Dror, R. O. (2024). The art and science of molecular docking. _Annual Review of Biochemistry_, _93_. <https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-biochem-030222-120000>

Suresh, P. S., Kumar, A., Kumar, R. & Singh, V. P. An _in-silico_ approach to bioremediation: Laccase as a case study. _J. Mol. Graph Model_ **26**(5), 845.9 (2008). [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmgm.2007.05.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmgm.2007.05.005 "Persistent link using digital object identifier").

Sahoo, Rudra & Pattanaik, Sovan & Pattnaik, Gurudutta & Mallick, Subrata & Mohapatra, Rajaram. (2022). Review on the use of Molecular Docking as the First Line Tool in Drug Discovery and Development. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences. 84. DOI:[10.36468/pharmaceutical-sciences.1031](http://dx.doi.org/10.36468/pharmaceutical-sciences.1031).

 

 

 

 

 
